
World’s First Wet-coated OLED Module Samples Now Available
Tokyo, September 25, 2014 – MC Pioneer OLED Lighting Corporation will start supplying samples of the world’s first (white monochromatic) OLED lighting modules in late September 2013. Employing a unique wet coating process to form the luminous layer, these OLED lighting modules can be produced at a much lower cost than ever before.
The process cuts manufacturing costs anywhere from a fifth to a tenth of what it takes to make conventional OLED lighting modules using vapor deposition. Not only that, by the time the wet-coated OLED lighting modules go into mass production they will also last about four times longer (30,000 hours at 2,000 cd/m2, LT70) than conventional modules as well.
Given their low-cost and long-life, these OLED lighting modules are expected to be used for a wide spectrum of purposes and applications, including conventional store, office and automotive lighting as well as cosmetic and medical lighting equipment. When combined with the current line of dimmable, color-tunable OLED lighting products (with a vapor-deposited luminous layer) available exclusively from MPOL, these new OLED lighting modules will offer a world of innovative lighting solutions.
OLED lighting panel
Vapor deposition vs. wet coating
The vapor deposition process takes place inside a vacuum chamber where thin layers of a material are formed via heating and evaporation. After being transformed into a gaseous state, a material is allowed to condense onto a substrate and form a thin film. While vapor deposition all occurs within a clean environment, much of the material is wasted. On top of that it is limited to smaller size substrates since making a larger vacuum chamber would just be too costly and technologically challenging.The wet coating process is a film formation technique where the materials are melted into a solution and then deposited directly onto a substrate. This process allows for the efficient use of material and makes it relatively easier to scale up manufacturing equipment since no vacuum is needed. That all adds up to a process that is perfect for larger substrates, provided that the environment and impurities in the solution are properly controlled.
Wet-coated OLED lighting module (white monochromatic) specifications
World’s First Wet-coated OLED Module Samples Now Available | 有機EL照明のことならMCパイオニアOLEDライティング(MPOL)
