Electron Cyclotron Resonance (ECR) plasmas have a wide field of application. The only required
power input is given by microwaves. This allows an electrode less design which makes ECR plasmas
attractive for laboratory usage and the near contamination less calibration [1,2] of space born particle
detectors as well as for space flight ion thrusters. The latter benefit from an increased reliability and
life time over competing plasma thruster concepts without ECR plasmas. 
The Mu10 ion thruster powering the HAYABUSA[3] space craft, scheduled for return from asteroid
Itokawa on June 13th, 2010, features a flight heritage which only a very small selection of space
propulsion devices ever achieved. It is this flight heritage which makes Mu10 attractive for the
application in the sub 1-tonne class geostationary satellites. However, in its current state, Mu10 is
leaking a significant amount of its ECR feeding microwaves [4] into outer space, interfering with C-band
communication. Suppressing these microwaves without changing the overall design of Mu10 is the
main topic of the current research. 
Because the microwaves pass through the Mu10 ECR plasma before they escape into outer space, the
microwave suppression involves not only the Mu10 structure but also the Mu10 ECR plasma itself. To
model, realize and to test an effective suppression mechanism, detailed numerical simulations of the
microwave propagation are being performed[5]. Due to its large size, the numerical problem is being
solved by using Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) and the CUDA (Compute Unified Device
Architecture) interface, both combined provide near supercomputer performance on a desktop system
but without the high cost and the constraints of a large super computer facility such as scheduling and
dedicated system coding.
1. Bodendorfer et al. Field structure and electron life times in the MEFISTO Electron Cyclotron Resonance Ion Source,
Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics research B, 266, p.820-828, 2008.
2. Bodendorfer et al. Identification of the ECR zone in the SWISSCASE ECR ion source, Nuclear Instruments and Methods
in Physics Research B, Volume 266, Issue 21, November 2008, pages 4788-4793
3. H. Kuninaka et. al. Powered Flight of HAYABUSA in Deep Space, 42nd AIAA Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit, 9-
12 July 2006, Sacramento, California, USA.
4. K. Nishiyama et al, Measurement of the Electromagnetic Emissions from the MUSES-C Ion Engine System, IEPC-01-
112, 27th International Electric Propulsion Conference, 15-19 October 2001, Pasadena, California, USA.
5. Bodendorfer et al. First economic massive parallel (CUDA) Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) simulation of the
μ10 ion thruster head, Space Transport Symposium, February 2010, ISAS, JAXA, Japan
太陽地球系物理コロキウム
