発電設備の制御を行うための中央制御盤1が設置される発電所の中央制御室に、建屋床よりも上方に位置する中央制御室躯体床22と、その上方に位置するアッセンブルエリア上部床54とを備える。The central control room of a power plant where a central control panel 1 is installed to control power generation equipment is provided with a skeleton floor 22 of the central control room located above a building floor and an upper floor 54 in an assemble area 23 located above the floor 22. - 特許庁
合意された基準又は目標に基づいて,継ぎ目なくかつ包括的に連結・統合されたアジア太平洋に向けた,複数年にわたる協力・活動の分野を詳述する青写真の作成,及び成果を定期的にレビューするためのタイムフレームの設定。To develop a blueprint based on agreed benchmarks or target, detailing areas for multi-year cooperation and activities towards a seamlessly and comprehensively connected and integrated Asia Pacific, and to establish a timeframe for regular reviews of our achievements. - 経済産業省
また、各国・地域の努力を超え、今後、東アジア地域の地理的近接性を活かした共同研究や、域内共通市場を睨んだ提携の下での共同事業等をそれぞれの国・地域の強みを活かしつつ推進すること等も有意義であると考えられる。Furthermore, it is considered valuable to be able to transcend the individual efforts of each country and region and promote joint projects through alliances that focus on joint research and intra-regional common markets that utilize the geographical proximity of the East Asian region while taking full advantage of the respective strengths of each country and region. - 経済産業省
緊急時の流動性支援体制の整備については、通貨危機後の1999年11月、フィリピン・マニラで開催されたASEAN+3首脳会議において、通貨・金融分野での「東アジアにおける自助・支援メカニズムの強化」の必要性について合意がなされた。Concerning the development of a liquidity support system for times of emergency, at the ASEAN+3Summit Meeting held in Manila, Philippines in November 1999 after the currency crisis, it was agreed that it was necessary to "enhance self-help and support mechanisms in East Asia" in the currency and finance sectors. - 経済産業省
また、旧東側諸国において共産主義体制の放棄と市場経済への移行が起こり、これらの移行経済国や中南米その他の発展途上国は、東アジア諸国の経済発展を目の当たりにして、同様の経済政策を採用した。In the meantime, former Eastern camp countries began abandoning communism and making transition to market economies. Having seen the economic development of East Asian countries, the countries in transition and developing countries in Latin America and other regions also came to adopt economic policies similar to the above. - 経済産業省
また、ODA供与とあわせ、アジア通貨・経済危機の際に、欧米企業が撤退する中、我が国企業は踏みとどまって粘り強く雇用を維持し、地場企業を積極的に支援したことが、同地域経済の回復に大きく貢献することにつながったとの指摘もある。In addition to ODA, the contribution of Japanese private companies is also pointed out; unlike European and the US companies that withdrew from Asia after the Asian currency and economic crisis, Japanese companies continued operation and maintained employment in the region, and their active support for local companies greatly contributed to the revitalization of Asian economy. - 経済産業省
また、近年の動向として、雇用労働者に占める正社員、パート等非正社員の構成比に大きな変化はないが、需要変動、アジアとの競合・価格競争等に伴い、派遣労働者が増加するなど、ものづくり現場全体としての就業形態は多様化(図表2−3)。A recent trend is the diversification of working styles across all kinds of monodzukuri jobs. For example, the number of dispatched workers has increased as companies try to cope with variations in demand, competition with Asian rivals and price competition, but there has been no significant change in the percentage of regular employees and that of non-regular employees (including parttimers) in the entire workforce (Chart 2-3). - 経済産業省
「多喜味」に関連した英語例文の一覧(8ページ目) - Weblio英語例文検索
