本研究では,我々が収録した日本語CDIデータベース(1,699幼児)と英語・スペイン語のLex2005 CDIデータベースを使用して,言語間での語彙習得時期の共通性を調べる.このため,語彙習得時期として50%の幼児が理解及び発声する理解日齢と発話日齢を求めた.この結果から,理解と発話の間の期間(理解-発話日数)を計算し,二つの言語間で,カテゴリ単位,語単位に理解日齢と理解-発話日数の相関係数を求めた.カテゴリ単位の相関では,英日,日スペイン間の理解日齢の相関係数がそれぞれ0.79と0.76となった.さらに,英日,日スペイン問の理解-発話日数の相関係数がそれぞれ0.75と0.74となった.また,語単位の相関では,英日,日スペイン間の理解日齢相関係数はそれぞれ0.57と0.62となった.さらに,英日,日スペイン間の理解-発話日数の相関係数はそれぞれ0.72と0.72となった.これらの結果は,カテゴリ単位,語単位で,理解日齢,理解-発話日数の両方で,強い相関あることを示す.これは,語の理解及び発声に関する習得時期に言語を超えて共通性があることを示唆している.
This study investigates cross-linguistic universality of word leaning using English and Spanish Lex2005 CDI database along with our Japanese CDI database (from 1,699 toddlers). We defined the word-comprehension and -production days as the days when 50% of the children comprehend and produce a word, respectively. We also calculated the period between comprehension and production. Between two languages, the correlations of comprehension days and periods between comprehension and production were calculated category on category and word on word. For category-on-category comparison of the comprehension days, English-Japanese and Japanese-Spanish correlation coefficients were 0.79 and 0.76, respectively. For category-on-category comparison of the comprehension days, English-Japanese and Japanese-Spanish correlation coefficients were 0.75 and 0.74, respectively. For word-on-word comparison of the periods between production and comprehension, English-Japanese, and Japanese-Spanish correlation coefficients were 0.57 and 0.62, respectively. For word-on-word comparison of the periods between production and comprehension, English-Japanese and Japanese-Spanish correlation coefficients were 0.72 and 0.72. These results confirmed there are strong correlations in word-comprehension days and periods between comprehension and production as seen through both category-on-category and word-on-word comparisons. This suggests that there is cross-linguistic universality of word acquisition ages in comprehension and production.

