このコンテンツについて
The Peak of British Railways diesel fleet comes to Train Simulator in original BR blue livery.
Built by BRs Derby and Crewe Works between 1960 and 1962, the Sulzer Type 4 diesel locomotive were the main passenger locomotives on the Midland Main Line from their introduction until their withdrawal in the early 1980s.
When initially put into service, the Peaks – their nickname inherited from their Class 44 predecessors – were fitted with multi-unit working and steam heating boilers for passenger services. However, in the early 1970s, 50 of the 183 built were fitted with the more modern electric train supply in place of steam heating boilers, and renumbered as Class 45/1.
With a top speed of 90mph (145 km/h), the Peaks also worked the North Trains-Pennine route from Manchester to Liverpool, becoming a common and popular sight until HSTs and more modern units took over in the 1980s.
The BR Class 45 Peak for Train Simulator is a former Iron Horse House model, which has been updated to TS2015 standard, including new scenarios and improved exterior modelling. Available in BR Blue livery, also included are BR Mk2a blue/grey passenger coaches.
The locomotive is also Quick Drive compatible, giving you the freedom to drive the BR Class 45 Peak on any Quick Drive enabled route for Train Simulator, such as those available through Steam. Also included are scenarios specifically for the Liverpool-Manchester route (available separately and required to play these scenarios).Scenarios
Three scenarios for the Liverpool-Manchester route:
Peak Day on the Mainline
Special Service to Manchester
Football Special Express
More scenarios are available on Steam Workshop online and in-game. Train Simulators Steam Workshop scenarios are free and easy to download, adding many more hours of exciting gameplay. With scenarios being added daily, why dont you check it out now!
Click here for Steam Workshop scenarios.Key Features
Class 45 Peak in British Railways blue livery
BR Mk2a blue/grey passenger coaches
Quick Drive compatible
Scenarios for the Liverpool-Manchester route
Download size: 288mb
Steam で 50% オフ:BR Class 45 'Peak' Loco Add-On
