本研究の主な成果は次の2項目である.
証明補完をまず,融合原理(resolution princeple)による矛盾の導出を用いた残余仮説の生成と一般化として定式化した.仮説生成が必要な状況では,与えられた事実は背景知識から帰結されないので,背景知識と事実の否定とが矛盾することはない.そこで,事実の否定と背景知識との基礎代入例(ground instance)の連言からブール代数によって恒偽な部分を除去して得られた詮理式を残余,その否定を残余仮説(residue hypothesis)とよぶ.残余仮説の一般化は融合原理の逆操作として定式化した.そして,アブダクションのための仮説生成規則や,帰納推論における底法(逆伴意法)や飽和法という推論現則が,残余仮説の導出とその一般化に様々な制限を与えたものであることを示すことができた.しかも,従来の仮説発見手法では仮説として単一の節しか生成できなかったが,残余仮説の導出を用いれば複数の節からなる仮説を同時に生成することができる.
次に,連結証明法(The Connection Method)を用いた証明補完を考察した.その結果;古典論理の範囲内で残余仮説を生成しているにも関わらず,与えられた事実と背景知識,残余仮説間の関係は,適切さの論理(relevant logic)の証明であることを明らかにした.適切さの論理では,前提となる論理式を全て利用することで帰結が証明される.この成果は,残余仮説に事実と背景知識を総動員してはじめて証明が完成していることを示している.仮説を生成する根拠はデータと背景知識しかないのであるから,仮説が事実の説明以上の能力を有しないという性質が,適切さの論理と結びつくのは自然な結果である.さらに,仮説発見には,複数個生成される仮説の中から適切な仮説を選択するという問題が常に付随するが,その基準として証明補完に証明の性質を用いた仮説の選択基準があることを示していることが明らかになった.
Hypothesis finding is an activity common to various types of inference investigated in AI. In this research project we developed logical inference methods for hypothesis finding based on our original idea "proof completion". In inferences formalized with logic, such as abduction, and machine learning, hypotheses are needed when observed facts cannot logically derived from background knowledge. This means that no proof from background knowledge successfully achieves the facts. Our idea "proof completion" is that hypotheses should be generated by observing such unsuccessful proofs and by completing one of such proofs.
In this project we realized proof completion as logical inference rules in two proof systems the resolution principle and the connection method. At first we formalized proof completion with the resolution principle. Since a proof is a refutation in the resolution principle, an incomplete proof there means a derivation of conjunction of clauses. All that we have to do in order to make the derivation become a refutation is to ground one of the derived conjunctions of clauses, to negate the grounded set, and transform the negation into a conjunction of clauses. We call the obtained conjunction of clauses a residue hypothesis. We showed that any correct hypothesis with which facts become inferable from background theory must be obtained by generalizing a residue hypothesis. This means that proof completion is generalization of residue hypotheses. We also showed that the hypothesis finding methods is abduction and some types of machine learning are obtained by giving some constraint to our proof completion method.
Secondly we formalized proof completion with the connection method. Since a derivation and a proof is represented as a graph in the connection method, we developed a rule which derives a residue hypothesis from an incomplete derivation. By analyzing the graph for the proof obtained by adding the residue hypothesis to the incomplete derivation, facts can be proved from background theory and the residue hypothesis in relevant logic. This result is quite natural because we give no information about the hypothesis except the facts and the background theory. The result also suggests a new criterion in choosing appropriate generalization of the residue hypothesis. The criterion is in which proof system facts can be proved from background theory and the hypothesis.
KAKEN - 証明補完技法に基く仮説発見システムの構成(12680364)
